---
title: "This Week I Learned: About TypeScript"
date: 2025-01-11
tags: [TypeScript, TIL, Deno, JavaScript]
description: TypeScript ain't so scary; DefinitelyTyped; Deno's prompt secret
---

## Why TypeScript? Aren't you like a full-time PHP guy?

Professionally, yes, I write PHP almost exclusively. But JavaScript is the web standard.
Almost all tech will be equalized being accessed through the browser. It makes sense to
be at least familiar with JavaScript. All of my JavaScript knowledge was based on what
I had learned in the early 2010s and I wanted to rectify that.

## Deno

[Deno](https://deno.com/) is a JavaScript runtime to sort out a lot of the warts of node.js,
led by Ryan Dahl, the same person who created node.js years ago. Ryan is also leading the
effort to cancel Oracle's trademark on the term "JavaScript," so that people can freely
title their course "Rust for JavaScript Devs" without having to worry about getting a
cease and desist letter for using a trademark. Sign the petition at [javascript.tm](https://javascript.tm/).

Deno focuses on a security model where you must authorize access to resources on your machine
or remotely. Additionally, Deno runs TypeScript natively without the need for a transpilation
step. This lowers the barrier for entry for a person like me. It also comes packaged
with its own formatter, linter, and package manager. Fewer things to install and configure
means I can start learning faster.

Deno offered a free sticker to anyone who completed [at least one Advent of Code puzzle using Deno](https://github.com/denoland/advent-of-code-2024).
I'm not the kind of person who wants to put stickers on things, but I thought it was fun,
so I gave it a shot.

### Learning Through Open-Source

I like the mission of Ryan Dahl and Deno. Hopefully not too annoying to the maintainers, I
also decided I would give back to the project and practice my TypeScript skills. I found an
open GitHub issue that seemed pretty self-contained: the `cli.promptSecret()` function
needed some love. `promptSecret` was designed to be used in a CLI where the user needed to
enter sensitive details into the terminal (like a password) and have the characters obscured.

The problem was that if you wrote more characters than the terminal width, it would begin to
duplicate the line.

```sh
Password: ********
Password: ********
*
Password: ********
**
```

The input still recorded properly, but the user-experience was confusing. I decided to take
a stab at it.

#### The previous implementation

Capture the input, store it in a variable, but don't write it to the terminal. Write the mask
string (`Password: ***`) instead, but first... we use `\r\u001b[K`, a
[cursor control sequence](https://gist.github.com/fnky/458719343aabd01cfb17a3a4f7296797#cursor-controls)
that clears the current line and jumps the cursor to the first column in the line.
That way, we have replaced the prompt with the new masked input.

Once you’ve reached the width of the console, the next character appears on the next line,
so clearing the current line and rewriting the mask is clearing the characters in the overflow
line. Hence the duplication.

```sh
Password: ********
*       <--- this is the current line now, so we only clear this,
             but the code is rewriting "Password: *********"
```

#### The solution

We need to know the character width of the console to start. Once our masked input has
reached the limit, the next character added automatically gets added to the next line. For
this reason, we only need to clear/rewrite characters exceeding the width.

This works great... but what about if the user starts to delete characters and we need
to go back to the first line?  We can use a different control sequence (`\r\u001b[1F`) to
jump to the start of the previous line.

There was some other fun things, like realizing we don't want to clear the current line
for the first character on the new line. :sweat_smile:

It was a fun [opportunity to contribute](https://github.com/denoland/std/pull/6318),
learn some modern JS, and understand console control sequences a bit better.

## Bun

[Bun](https://bun.sh/) is another JS runtime, similar to node or Deno. It's receiving a lot
of buzz in the tech world for its speed and its big standard library. Bun offers
the ability to run TypeScript without a transpilation step. I also did a handful of Advent of
Code exercises in Bun [though no sticker :(] and found it easy and fast to develop with.

Interested to give back, I saw an open issue on their GitHub that noted that `@types/bun`
didn't contain types for some of the recently added standard library functions.

### DefinitelyTyped

DefinitelyTyped owns the `@types` namespace on npm. It is a community project that allows
adding TypeScript definitions for popular libraries. Some projects are written in TypeScript,
so this is less necessary, but for projects written in JavaScript, supplementing the library
with type definitions helps give type-safety in userland code. Interestingly, anyone is
free to submit type definitions for a package. For instance, jQuery may not be interested
in adding type definitions, but a community member may create a jquery.d.ts file and submit
it to DefinitelyTyped. Then a user can include `@types/jquery` in their project and not have
to deal with every function accepting and returning `any` as its value.

To fix the Bun issue, all I had to do was open a PR that pointed to the latest release of bun.
A maintainer of the Bun project was pinged by a bot to approve the PR, and it was available
to the world.

## Thoughts on TypeScript

I look forward to playing with TypeScript, Deno, and Bun more.  A lot of the trepidation
I had was having to relearn all of the things I missed out in the ~15 years I was away
from the JavaScript world, but thanks to the wealth of free resources (and a very patient
colleague), I found that getting back up to speed was pretty easy.

Admittedly, TypeScript has a type system with lots of intricacies, and I still have a lot
to learn. Despite its reputation, there's plenty that can be done without understanding
the advanced topics. This makes the barrier to entry much lower than I would have expected.


