---
title: "A month in with AI first development"
date: 2026-04-25
tags: AI, development, skills, cursor, claude
---

My company recently announced a mandate that 95% of code should be generated by an LLM. Having had about one month in to this new workflow, I wanted to catalog my experiences to date.

## Stages of Grief

It may seem unusual, but moving to an AI-first workflow took me through the stages of grief. Grief is about the pain of loss, and a job change is significant loss. For me, programming is more than just a job, but it's also a hobby and a little bit of my identity.

* Denial - AI isn't good enough; it will never compare to me as a programmer. This is a fad. Tokens are going to be too expensive without VC subsidization, so it won't last. The people using AI are overstating its value and ability.
* Anger - I can't believe they're trying to replace me. Maybe I should just find a different career path. Programming is a joke now. All software is going to fail in 18 months.
* Depression - How will I feed my family once they've totally replaced me? What do I do for fun now that bots will fix everything in open-source? My job is just going to be clicking approve on giant PRs; I'm becoming alienated from the system for which I am responsible.
* Bargaining - I'll burn tokens for non-sense things and maybe just use it for search. Maybe it can write the tests and I'll still write the code.
* Acceptance - This is a bigger picture.

Grief is non-linear, nor is it something that is conquered. There are days where I move from acceptance to anger to denial.

## Acceptance?

Corners of the internet have their own cultural beliefs and norms. We love to think of ourselves are purely logical beings, unswayed by social pressures or God forbid, our emotions. Nuance is often lacking. The prevailing doomer belief on Reddit is not correct, nor is the AI-utopia belief on X. Everyone's story and belief reflects a little objective truth as well as some phase of their grief.

## Current Stance

Again, just my beliefs here, and I'm sure they're mixed up in their own way.

### AI Isn't Good Enough

Not yet, anyhow. The most challenging part of software development is understanding a system and making non-breaking changes when requirements shift. The bigger a system is, the lower the test coverage, the poorer documented a system is, the worse the AI outcomes will be. By default, it's not going to tell you this: it's not going to ask you for clarity about something, it's not going to suggest you pushback against requirements. AI is a highly confident, highly capable sycophant.

There are ways to seek clarity before diving in, like [Matt Pocock's grill-me](https://github.com/mattpocock/skills/blob/main/grill-me/SKILL.md) skill. This is not the default behavior for an LLM.

One of the dreams being sold by agentic development is that anybody can commit code to a project. How do commit code when you don't know the ramifications of your change and don't know you need to probe and challenge your agentic partner?

### But AI is Pretty Good

@todo
